so this is a fascinating area of
criminology this is one of the great
insights of the last generation of
criminological work if I send 10 cops to
the corner do the bad guys just move and
the answer is they don't criminals are
lazy BR you keep your wallet god dude
there's cops let's do it again tomorrow
criminology is rooted in place more than
the individual oh absolutely cuz you
would think that this would be random
right it's not random this block no
crime this block no crime this block the
crime here for like 15 years it's the
strangest
thing this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson your personal astrophysicist I'm
here with Chuck KN Chucky baby hey Neil
yeah what's happening we got a really
cool guest today one of the coolest the
coolest like ever yeah I mean for our
nerd audience our nerd audience malcol
Gladwell welcome back to start talk
thank you this may be your third time
I'm checking my numbers here I was last
year in 20 did you hear you say I was
here in
we had you on one of our live Stark talk
lives on stage as well yeah very good
very cool and this man can't stop
writing bestselling books I what's your
problem it's an El it's a serious
Affliction isn't it huh you just wake up
and you're just like oh you vomit and
the bestsell on the bed how did this
happen I wish not again it's quality
vomit that's what you're saying I'm
looking at the list here blink we all
remember blink What the Dog Saw I think
I missed that one uh Goliath outliers
Tipping Point those were big ones
tipping points a big big on and of
course uh right now uh you've got
revenge of the Tipping Point and uh this
like Tipping Point the sequel is this
the this is yeah this is this is part
two is is Marvel the Marvel Universe
getting to you okay well the question is
which Revenge am I referring to there's
a number of revenges oh okay okay I
think I was I think I was thinking of
Revenge of the Pink Panther which dates
me terribly okay revenge of the Pink
Panther Revenge of the Nerds I would
have gone with the Nerds is a good one
that's a big Revenge Pink Panthers a
little before so let's if we
characterize you I've got some notes
Here say that you unravel strange human
phenomena and reveal the science and the
and the the
psychology that underpins that conduct
so Malcolm remind us it's been a few
years since the original Tipping Point
remind us of the thesis of that book The
idea was that I had just when I wrote
The Tipping Point I had just been uh
covering the AIDS epidemic for the
Washington Post oh so you come to this
as a journalist that journal chops who
had just been immersed in epidemiology
for like a good six years let me just
remind people epidemiology you know the
study of how epidemics behave yeah yeah
epidemics and what how they spread and
how they are contained or even how we
infect each other how we infect each
other how we infect each other that's
basically epidemic I mean and like so
many um scientific professions there are
certain moments when
epidemiologists matter and there are
certain moments when we forget about
them and they have conversations among
themselves and HIV was one of those
occasions when suddenly they seemed you
know they were part of the cultural
conversation Co was another all of a
sudden we heard from these people who we
don't we don't normally pay any
attention to them and so I had been
immersed in the world of epidemiologist
and I was so fascinated by The Peculiar
way in
which epidemics of disease behave I was
in the library at NYU Bob's Library one
day I used to go there and hang out in
the stacks and read uh academic journals
at randoms that is so geeky of you it's
so geeky it is very geeky it erect a
statue to you for this okay and I one
day I remember this moment I was in the
uh
hm. one aisle
okay and I was reading back issues as as
one don't tell me you haven't done this
because you have go keep going by the
way I'm a hm. two guy myself you know um
and I was reading a back a bound volume
of back issues of the American Journal
of sociology and I read a paper by a guy
called Jonathan Crane and it was the
whole premise of the paper was let's use
um epidemiological models to to
examine um social pathology crime
delinquency teenage pregnancy it do they
spread in the same way was that article
I think it was from the uh uh the
article was from the 1980s oh so so it
was it was it was a modern article was
like the 1800s but at the time he wrote
that that was a very novel idea yeah he
was literally taking he was L taking the
formal principles of disease
epidemiology and laying them over as
soci that's how I think of the term not
specifically disease but human behavior
and how you might track that and
understand it so if it began there I'm
very impressed by that well what did it
I mean it's interesting did it begin
there it's it was the first time I had
ever seen and if you read the article it
was clear that there wasn't a rich
literature of people in that formally
applying I mean they may have informally
have used that but formally applying the
techniques to he was so he he showed for
example
um used would be mathematical techniques
wouldn't yes mathematical techniques and
one of the things he showed for example
was that when the percentage of uh
professionals so people with higher
education some fell below a certain uh
critical threshold social problems
exploded I thought was incredibly
interesting yes and he tracked across
all of these neighborhoods and looked at
out migration of a certain kind of role
model in other words when you when you
remove role models you know the first
couple you remove doesn't make them and
then all of a sudden there's a kind of
moment when boom a
TI a Tipping Point okay I had just been
this was I I was in the library in New
York in 19 this is in
1996 and I just been living through the
beginnings of that this extraordinary
decline in crime in New York and I was
trying to make sense of it because
nobody could explain to me why would
crime Fall by whatever it fell by iously
precipitously in the 90s and everyone of
course wants to take credit for that
everyone want to take credit yeah and it
wasn't just New York City it was the
whole country although later it was just
New York City this is interesting
because there's two New York City crime
declines keep going here but um and no
one could explain why and I wanted to
understand it conceptually and it struck
me when I read that article that this
was the conceptual explanation that
crime was a contagious phenomenon and it
had just tipped in the way that
epidemics often tip and that was the
Genesis of that book Tipping Point wow
wow okay that's fascinating it all
begins in the stacks of an academic
Library this is am I I'm just playing to
you right now Neil okay no we're good
we're good now one of your stories if I
remember the book yeah uh you talk about
Big Bird I have a long thing on Sesame
Street too long in retrospect when I
went back when I went back to reread
that I was like what was I
doing and then but I that that chapter
that that section stayed with me because
you never know what little feature of a
story is actually going to make the
difference and put it over the top yeah
and if I remember correctly you
suggested that big bird which is an
absurd element in in Sesame Street when
you think about it right you're not
walking around say Gee let's get a seven
foot yellow bird bird right we need that
who's thinking this right right and so
because everybody on who wrote Sesame
Street was high as
hell wo they were smoking some good
stuff so so am I am I remembering that
correctly with with big bird well that
there I was interested in the dimension
of you know an important dimension in
understanding contagion is the
duration of the of your of your kind of
um contagious window right okay that uh
you know if covid had a had a basically
a 48h hour window when we were highly
contagious before the anybody responds
if that if that infectious window is uh
24 hours the ability of the the the the
the virus could be exactly the same in
every other dimension and its ability to
spread would be cut in half or dimin
even more than half more than the longer
the incubation period the more effective
the virus will be exactly so Malcolm
this concept of stickiness yeah that can
help us transition from the original
Tipping Point to the Revenge of the
Tipping Point you had like three rules
or three three the other rules were uh
what I call the law of the few which is
the idea that in an epidemic often not
always the epidemic is driven by a very
very very small fraction of the
population interesting the super
spreaders super spreaders which are you
know it's funny because there was this
whole backlash against super spreaders
um in the epidemiological community with
many people saying that when we look at
uh uh contagious um uh viruses you know
we don't see this and now but then Co
happened and Co is the kind of er
example of uh of asymmetry in an
epidemic it is like in a in a room I the
most to me the most interesting part of
fascinating part to write of my new book
was I was talking to all these aerosol
experts so these are the guys who study
aerosols are the particles in the air
yeah the droplets that come out of your
mouth when you speak that and when you
have covid there virus particles inh
aerosol I think that's the only reason
why a mask can work at all because it's
it's attached to an aerosol and it stops
the aerosol absolutely virus partic the
virus is much much smaller but the virus
is still carried not only by the airus
can't fly by itself no that's what I'm
saying it's carried and that's what
carried in the in the droplet but when
you when you examine on large groups of
people what you discover is that the the
um there's a a very small number of
people whose level of aerosol production
is like 10 20 30 40 times greater than
the mean the thing about super spreading
being a super spreader is you probably
don't know that you are right in fact
you almost and and do we have a
physiological reason why the people's
production of aerosols was so high like
are they big mouth people do they have
large lungs is that they talk loud or
they we're still figuring this out the
hypotheses on the table now there's one
guy guy named Edwards at Harvard who is
who thinks that it's correlated with
obesity and age
interesting but then another a a little
more slightly more convincing
explanation comes from this other guy
who says that it's really driven by
something quite idiosyncratic in the way
that your um saliva moves through your
um uh throat Canal there's a there was a
small group of people who studied the
production of aerosols in a across a
variety of you know like they're really
interested in automobile emissions or
they're really interested in air
pollution or they're interested in when
you fry bacon what comes off off the
bacon you know when you smell it what
are you smelling right all those kinds
of but they very very early on in the
pandemic a bunch of and it's a very
obscure feel of they're chemists right
they're not involved with with um with
uh medicine or human biology at all very
early on in the pandemic in one of these
incredibly obscure aerosol journals a
bunch of Aeros solists wrote an an
editorial this is like in March of 2020
when they said first of all this thing
is Airborne it has to be because it's
coming up through aerosols and two
you're going to see a really really
really
asymmetrical distribution of aerosol
production so be aware that 1% of the
population is doing all the damage they
they told us they gave us a road map in
March 2020 but part of it is I think
it's very and I think Neil you know
exactly what I'm talking about here it
is very difficult to go back and I mean
at the time you don't know what to pay
attention to there's a there's a dis
there's a disciplinary thing here it's
very hard to get the attention of a
public health or a biologist in a time
of Crisis to what a chemist is saying
they're not that's dawn of Co you're not
reading you're not saying oh the
chemists have the answer but even so all
I'm saying is we don't have an inventory
of every other possible paper that was
written that only now we go back and say
hey they had Insight we should have
listened to them when 99 others that
that you didn't listen to you shouldn't
have listened to because we call that
hindsight hey Star Talk fans I don't
know if you know this but the audio
version of the podcast actually posts a
week in advance of the video version and
you can get that in Spotify and apple
podcast and most other podcast Outlets
that are out there multiple ways to
ingest all that is Cosmic on Star talk
so this is the law of the few and then
you have a third law what is that well
the third law has to do with the power
of context but in this book I I'm I I I
talk about what I call the overstory
which is just the idea that the
narratives of any
Community uh powerfully inform the be
the behavior of the members of that
community in a way that we may not be
aware of and I I get into this whole
literature of medical variation that the
way doctors practice differs in
completely inexplicable and bizarre ways
from one Community to the next across um
the develop world I mean I mean I give
the example of the way that your
cardiologist treats you in Buffalo is
radically different from the way your
cardiologist treats you in Boulder the
fact that you might be a better doctor
if you went to a better medical school
that there there's something wrong with
that in a civilized society what's
interesting about this all doctors
should have the same power of knowledge
wisdom and insight treating you and they
don't and that's a problem but this this
this observation is about something
slightly different from that which is
when I say that the way you're treated
is different in Boulder and bming in
Boulder and buffalo that's not to say
that one is worse than the other right
it's just different so there are ways in
which uh Buffalo is better than Boulder
and ways in which Boulder is better
better than Buffalo and it has nothing
to do with it may be the this this can
be true even if the doc the cardiologist
of Boulder and buffalo attended the same
medical schools interesting this is
quite this is apart from differences in
training you know when you go uh and
they put a when they're doing a a
catheter uh in America when you're a
cardiac cath catheter uh for the longest
time we put in catheters in your thigh
right thigh was the standard in Buffalo
to the to the artery the veins that go
up in Buffalo they put it in through the
wrist okay now the wrist is harder to
learn how to do that but the
complications are way lower it's it's
faster it's safer it has better outcome
but you have to be you have to learn how
to do it first Buffalo's way ahead on
putting it through the wrist places like
Boulder are way behind why is Buffalo
that way because the guy who invented
putting in through the wrist through
wrist is from Montreal so it's was
closer to the source in the hood it's
spread from Montreal to Toronto right
and then Toronto down to Buffalo because
there's a lot of back and forth between
cardiologists I I I cannot sit here
calmly and defend that fact I would just
say in the future AI would have that
understood perfectly and so we wouldn't
need Regional differences in awareness
of doctors yeah that's the future of
civiliz be a uniform protocol that is
established but you but you have to that
I mean eventually what happens is bowler
eventually catches up and now if you go
in if you have a heart attack they're
gonna put it in through your wrist no
sure and the the the the the delay is
only partially caused by a lack of
knowledge it requires a doctor the
person putting in the catheter to get
extra training and if everyone around
you in Buffalo is doing the wrist you do
the wrist otherwise you look like a like
a fool right interesting but in Boulder
if they're all doing the they're all
doing the um the th the thigh you do the
thigh bring on the AI not only to learn
what to do but actually to do the do wow
you just don't want you going doctors
going doctor you just threw doctors
under the bus that's what you did you
were just like I tell you what we're
going to do we're going to actually go
in through the thigh and by that I mean
the artery that will let doctors bleed
out what's that line from Shakespeare I
first kill all the lawyers now first
kill all the doctors the that's Theon
Tyson prescrition not what I said
somebody has to the AI is not going to
develop the new method somebody has to
do that and then it's disseminated
instantly right and performed possibly
by robotic uh surgeons so it sounds to
me like what you're saying is that our
influence upon one another is in itself
an epidemiological phenomena uh that's
well well put yeah when it said there's
an obesity epidemic I said no you can't
catch fat from people so why are you
calling it epidemic I was very resistant
at the time I'm much more relaxed about
I was going to say because based on what
we just been discussing you can actually
catch fat from people because what
happens is the
sociological um I'll say pressures that
lead to obesity that are resident in a
particular Subs Society people will
actually join in that behavior that
behavior then in turn leads to obesity
so you have indeed caught fat caught
fat if you want to go to a private uh
girl school in the upper side of
Manhattan and then go to a uh you know
Rural High School in Alabama and uh tell
me there isn't a a there isn't a a uh a
profound difference in the um cultural
circumstances that drive obesity right
yeah I'm just saying I I warmed up to it
I'm just when I first heard it I was
thinking biologically not culturally and
so I was resistant to using it ever in
that way but i' I've softened up over
time no so take into the new book what
what what is what are the New
Perspectives you're bringing to the
table the I was much more um uh taken by
uh the the the Dynamics of of of of
epidemics in other words the law of the
few for example the this I begin to
realize it's a much more radical
observation that an epidemic is driven
by a small number of people than I had
realized with the first book I was
thinking kind of you know the 8020 rule
there's a you know big group of us and
now I realize oh no no no it's super
specific specific and it's really the
the number of people who drive epidemics
are a tiny tiny tiny fraction of the
population and we need to our
expectation that all of us are somehow
all lumped in the middle and we all sort
of equally contribute to these things is
just wrong um I'm much more fascinated
and mystified by patterns of
environmental um contagion than I was in
the first book I just I don't really
understand so You' you've raised an
issue that could become social culturals
for example if you find out that a
certain types of people are these super
oh yeah they call them um super emitters
super emitters okay if you find out that
super emitters are all contained within
one genetic demographic that requires a
different solution to resolve because
this is you know is that any different
from the AIDS epidemic remember well old
enough to remember we are old enough to
remember that it was like it was a
disease just in homo male homosexuals so
therefore ban you know all people don't
react rationally to that kind of
information so how does your
analysis and the revelation of this
manifest in terms of policy well that's
this is a this you you're putting your
finger on an extremely important point I
would say that you're absolutely right
that there are as many troubling
outcomes from this as there are positive
outcomes and you the the simple answer
is this we have to start the
conversation now exactly I I don't trust
us as a species based on the history of
anthropology especially European
anthropology and what they say about
groups and places and races and track
record I the track record is so bad
right on up through through Eugenics and
Nazism it is so bad uh it may be that we
just have to treat everybody equally
knowing that that treatment is excessive
for some but just right for others but
then no one gets differently treated
that may be the only solution oh I see
what you're saying so some of us may
suffer a little more than others so that
we might achieve a greater good by
serving all so whatever measures have to
be taken are taken across the board even
though they don't really apply to me as
much I think we need that got so for so
so I an example here might be if 90 out
of 100 people don't need to wear masks
because they're not spewing thing it
still make everybody wear mask see that
was the whole that was the whole problem
is that the people were like I don't
want to wear a mask and even though they
were like listen what we know from 1918
starting back then what we know for a
fact is that masking reduces
transmission we know that for a fact and
people were like I don't care different
that's a the freedom call that came
later and that was different I'm just
making the simple point that in a
society where we want everyone to be
treated equally under the law to have a
law that applies only to some people you
must wear a mask and the rest of you
don't have to my experience with our
species tells me that will not work yeah
and so you just make the rule for
everyone and that's it well let me give
you another example the same phenomenon
okay uh one of the things that
criminologists have observed is that
these same patterns of extreme variation
um happen in uh violent crime yes so I
look at a map of New York City and any
City for that matter and you will find
that on like 5% of Street segments
blocks uh 5% of Street segments of of
New York City account for north of 50%
of all violent Crim it's super specific
when I say A Street segment so we're
talking about we're not saying the South
Bronx is a dangerous place this no no
this is saying no no no most of the
South Bronx is totally safe but there
are very spe or there's a there are 10
hotpots yeah there's a street corner on
the you know on on York and uh 91st
that's problematic so the rational
response to that is to say oh we don't
need police the same distribution of
police in every Precinct in the city
what we should be doing and this is what
the NYPD did
and that caused the Second Great decline
crime decline in New York which was they
said okay we're just going to shift huge
numbers of resources from you know the
90% of places that are relatively safe
and just dump them on those very very
specific hotspots I'm sure that people
anticipated the very argument that
you're making saying people are going to
object to that they're going to say
you're taking 10 of my police officers
away from my precinct so you can send
them to a street corner in like you know
East New York why that's unfair blah as
it turns out the what people were I
think were able to realize was that
bringing the overall crime rate in the
city down was uh was a um made that
price worth paying that you could
convince them by showing them oh this is
going to make the whole city a better
place for all of us you can give up your
10 why didn't the crime just move to
another block it was like
pornography Time Square you know you you
knock it out here then it went to 7th
Avenue to eth Avenue to 10th Avenue
right then it went on the internet and
everybody's right this is you're not
going to get rid of something that kind
of built into the system no this was so
this is a fascinating area of
criminology this is one of the great
insights of the last generation of
criminological work after they made this
observation they then went to this very
question displacement as it's called in
criminology which is okay if I send 10
cops to the corner of you know York
Avenue in 91st do the bad guys just
mooved 93 93rd 95th and the answer
is they don't they do in a little bit I
mean do you see some displacement but to
a remarkable extent criminals are
lazy or they're both lazy walk away you
keep your wallet God dud there's cops
let's do it again tomorrow no you're
right uh the word they would use is that
criminology is rooted in place in other
words more than more than the individual
oh absolutely so the famous work on this
was done I think for the first time in
Seattle and they and it took it's a very
simple thing but no one did it for the
longest time which was to Overlay crime
data on a map right no one had ever done
it in a systematic way and when they
finally started doing this the guy did
is a guy named Weis bird David Weis bird
what they discover is this pattern that
like there's like look at the B he I
started in Seattle you look at the map
of Seattle there's like 15 hotpots in
Seattle where a huge proportion a hot
spot is a block a huge proportion of
violent crime is happening at any given
moment so then they say okay what
happens when we look at next year's data
did the spots move they don't move what
happens if you look five years later do
the spots move they don't move spots
aren't moving it's and I don't no one
can no one has a kind of ultimately
satisfactory answer for this because you
would think that this would be random
right right it's not random it is and
they can take you I actually I have been
someone took me on a tour of Baltimore a
guy who worked with Weisberg a woman who
work with Weisberg we drove around
Baltimore for a day and she did this
exact thing we we drive through like the
worst neighborhoods in West Baltimore
and she would say uh this block no crime
this block no crime this block been
crime here for like 15 years next block
no crime next SC it's the strangest
thing wow it really is the strangest
thing these are fascinating Revelations
all of your books do that for the reader
it's like well I never knew that I never
cuz you did all the homework right and
you put it in the book so if you arrive
at these points of awareness presumably
they lead to Solutions so that there
would ultimately be no problems left for
you to write about in a book so what's
what's going on there I have confidence
that there will always be problems for
me to write about NE just a question and
you fix it in one place and then you
move and then it gets go goes goes back
those spots move those spots move those
SP but no what's interesting about if I
can can I rant about criminology my
favorite I love criminology so much it's
such a fascinating field so much has
happened in the
last generation in terms of our
understanding of crime it's just like
that's another reason I wanted to write
this book is that writing about crime in
the 19 excuse me in the 1990s compared
with writing about crime today it's it
is literally it's like writing about
physics before Einstein and writing
about physics afterwards okay hence
you're you see it don't you like the way
I constantly did there constant not
necessary but I welcome it you like
it just improving his comfort level his
count softened every now I just think
everything is just being fra it's really
coming through a the prism of physics so
I have to kind
of uh so this is part of what leads you
to this update or this this sequel yeah
because the analysis is renewed in ways
that
is really you have to I had originally
thought I was just going to do a revised
edition of the original Tipping Point
for on its anniversary and I realized
you can't revise something that's rooted
in the our understandings from 25 years
ago you just can't you got to start over
again kind of the nature of a Tipping
Point is you don't see it coming yeah I
mean think about it oh do you when when
you see it coming it's too late ah okay
so the anticipation a Tipping Point
where are we in that world of Anis of
phenomena tipping phenomena CU it's not
what use is it to just know everything
about it after the fact you know if you
can't prevent it from happening again
let's imagine let's use our
example covid December of and November
of 2019 we have these reports coming out
of Wuhan but let's let's do another
version of that and say that we have
vastly improved surveillance where
somebody
is is regularly sampling
um you know the spread of the of uh IND
people who are infected and we're
monitoring the spread of the virus a
little more closely than we are now
could we kind of run that data through a
you know an advanced algorithm and say
absence some intervention this thing
blows up in March of that would be a
typing Point great yeah yeah I think you
I you'd have to that's what
epidemiologists are supposed to be able
to do do but they never ever have the
resources we only give them the
resources after the fact after the fact
if you were to build a really effective
surveillance system I mean we should be
doing this right now with this whole
Avan flu thing which is quite terrifying
to be honest I would just like to do a
little experiment where we go for five
years and we give the
epidemiologists everything they want you
just say what do you want it's if they
totaled up this is what's so hilarious
to me about science funding in this
country the numbers are so tiny like the
entire budget of nhh is like 40 billion
not for
long not for long like I If if somebody
if they you could slip it past Cong they
could add a zero and slip it past
Congress and no one would notice no one
know they should just add a zero and see
if any know see if it happens 4 a
billion in the grand scheme of things
yeah it's like and like that's what
they're arguing over so the
epidemiologist if you added up
everything they wanted it literally it
would be in the millions I'm sure we
call Budget dust that's what we call it
really small enough to barely be noticed
oh put in their budget dust nice you
played that game we said a lot with with
NASA there programs you want to put in
NASA has a budget right now yeah NIH
used to be less than NASA if memory
serves and now they're higher than NASA
uh NASA is between 25 and 30 billion
right but Ness has does very visible
things for that with space station and
the James webace telescope and Rovers
and very visible and we're going back to
the moon so lot of public recognition
with NASA too that's right and so but
you're absolutely right when you look at
the full budget of the country we're
talking about nothing it is so so you
want to be the champion of the
epidemiologist this is cool I think it'd
be I mean because the consequences I
think it'd be great are The Economic
Consequences of another pandemic we know
what we're talking about in trillions of
dollars trillions so like it seems like
a really really really insurance policy
yeah yeah take it's a minor insurance
policy and someone told me that the
total amount of money would cost every
year to permanently predict protect us
prepare us for any future uh viral
outbreak is um something like 25 billion
a year in other words they could do it
they could have vaccines at the ready
anything isn't that what we're already
trying to do with the anticipated flu
vaccines each year they go understand
you go to Southern Hemisphere or
Australia they see where it is
and our Seasons absolutely you know
where they they make them just across
the river have you ever been there in in
um near niyak
like we could drive 20 minutes from here
and they don't let you in but they have
you know it's this CRA it's this totally
crazy thing because you they're like
growing them in like um we're growing
what they're growing they grow the virus
they they find the flu virus they they
pick a strain right this and it's a big
strain picking conference every year in
like I it's more than once a year I
think it's in rock where you going honey
I'm going strain
picking me find me some viruses that
that'll show up later years ago when I
was at the was post I think I went I
went to one of those meetings where it's
a big they they huddle and they have all
of everyone makes the case for one train
or other which one do we think is going
to win out and then they that's the one
because you need a lead time it takes a
long time to make the virus so you got
to you're picking quite early and this
is another area where you could say does
Ai and things like that does that
improve our um does it a improve our
accuracy does an you know and they they
grade themselves after it's all over
well did we do or can we shrink the if
if we could shrink the time it takes to
make the vaccine then we can pick later
and our accuracy will go up I mean
hundreds of thousands of lives lie in
the balance these are insanely
consequential decisions people don't
realize that just the flu itself just
regular flu
influen still somewhere around 45,000
people a year yeah just popping off
because and Co believe it or not even
higher yeah
even higher still to this day you know
and people don't think about it it's a
nasty yeah it's nasty it is a nasty yeah
I want to ask something about
epidemiologist in your opinion because
they seem to have unorthodox means of
finding information do you think that
works against them like I remember in
covid and they were the first to say all
right we got to study poop and we're
going to study all these people's poops
in in these in these sewers and and they
were amazing at predict
what community was going to have an
outbreak by studying poop but when
people heard they studying poop they
were like oh get get the hell out get
out of here yeah the poop stuff is
actually really fascinating because the
poop stuff is uh it it was one of the
first places we began to see these
radical asymmetries you could you could
see enormous numbers of amounts of virus
coming from very very very specific
locations it wasn't uniformly spread it
was like um I forgotten there's some
incredible Story one of these aerosols
told me about that kind of analysis but
no I think you know people need to get
over it like I don't understand why
there's something something happened
where we so fell out of love with the
kind of scientific Enterprise that we
went in a span of a generation from
eagerly lining up to get our shot to
somehow being afraid of the needle I
mean I just I Hon how do we solve that
well uh I think we should stop call
calling vaccines vaccines very good name
facelift Jennifer call it Jennifer no
think about I'm go give me some
Jennifer imagine if it was it could
easily
be uh something that you sniff right
could be nasal yes um and if and suppose
we just said and we didn't call it a
vaccine we just called it a cocaine
cocaine he said something you sniff I
figure people like cocaine something
yeah that would be that would appeal
just some just you just say look this in
the same way that I take you know some
people take you know eonia to ward off a
cold you say just sniff this to ward off
Co how hard is that right so I actually
think an awful lot of way more vaccine
skepticism was just fear of needles than
we acknowled I think a lot of people are
would would rather make a pretend to
make a principled ideological case
against science than admit that they're
scared of needles absolutely I I agree
100% because there are a c certain
amount of people every year in this
country who take an aspirin or an nid or
a cenin and they die okay but you don't
hear about that because that's just part
of the risk all right and nobody says
well I would never take that because
it's not safe or whatever you know but
stick a needle in their arm and they're
just like it's so invasive I'm putting
something in you well you're putting
something in you every time you breathe
in you're putting something in you every
time you swallow something you're
putting something in you every time you
eat you're always putting something in
you but for some reason reason the
needle just seems so invasive yeah there
is so many of our our our kind of myths
about things that are scary are about
some something getting inside of us you
know and that's May that's why the
original alien movie was so potent right
where the yeah the little snake man that
popped out your yeah your stomach yeah
that's yeah the beast in me yeah yeah
you ever wanted one of your questions on
the universe answered we all have
questions about the universe black holes
to quazars quantum entanglement
wormholes there is no end to the depths
of cosmic curiosity well the entry level
of patreon membership with Star Talk
gets you just that I think it starts at
$5 a month you have access to the
question line that reaches our Cosmic
query programming and not only that we
produce a special Cosmic queries
installment just for patreon members if
you weren't the director of the Hayden
planetarium what do you think you would
be doing okay but this had to be another
Universe it wouldn't happen in this
universe okay I'd be I'd be a a
songwriter for Broadway musicals oo so
that's the entry level and the perks
ascend from there uh there's a level in
fact where we send you a an autographed
copy of one of my latest books
uh right now it's Star Messenger Cosmic
perspectives on civilization and it's
signed with my fancy fountain pen with
purple ink so I invite you to just check
the link below and all of that money
goes to our ability to experiment with
new ways of bringing the universe down
to earth so thank you for those who have
already joined and we welcome others to
participate in this Grand Adventure of
what it is to bring the universe down to
earth as always keep looking up do you
think all the epidemiologists need is
more money or will that just give us
more epidemiologists to just participate
in this exercise well so this is a
really interesting broader question
which is uh what is the right amount of
any kind
of specialist in society so I don't know
we don't know whether we have the right
amount of epidemiologists and the only
way find out is to conduct an experiment
like an epidemiological exp an
epidemiological experiment which is this
double the number matter right let's
double the number and see what happens
double the amount of money we give them
let's make more of them and just observe
are we better off or worse off we
effectively did this in the postwar
years in America where we post second
world war post second world war yeah
where we what do we do you know we
increased the number of English
professors by some extraordinary number
right done this we've done this
experiment didn't know that we've
increased the number of plastic surgeons
in America over the last so periodically
we do
radically you know uh so the number of
soldiers in the first world war was R
you know ratcheted up overnight and so
then they would make better predictions
they would make better an anticipations
of what the next virus will be they'll
turn up they're not necessarily the the
virus makers but you'd fund the rep
they would inform the people who are
actually making the Therapeutics and
vaccines I mean the quality of
information that would flow in that
direction would improve so it might be
that the future is not the absence of a
devastating
virus it's our capacity to handle it
when it comes up that would solve the
problem just as much as having a perfect
antiviral serum that would be anti every
viral virus right that's the dream yeah
the dream but if we have a system in
place where no matter the virus it never
gets foothold yeah no this is this idea
of
building the like The Economist you know
talk endlessly about State capacity
which is something distinct from
knowledge or resources which is your
ability to act on information
information and what you I think if we
focused heavily on state capacity my
favorite state capacity example would be
the in Co the best Detectors of covid
were dogs by by far H by far smelling
yeah yeah yeah sense of smell you could
I went I did this this this episode of
my podcast we went out to Alabama where
they train covid sniffing dogs the dogs
outperform every other test of covid um
they you know because dogs we've known
for a long time that dogs are better
than you know they can detect colon
colon colon cancer better than a
colonoscopy they can detect prostate
cancer better than a than a uh uh one
that antigen test they're just really
good there is something to distinctive
about um they see smell they see smell
so a good State
capacity uh preparation for the next
pandemic is to uh breed tons and tons
and tons of talks it's my favorite thing
just a a giant like a kind of a a
strategic canine you know uh unit uh
Reserve right okay we'll put it out in
Oklahoma we'll have like 10,000 German
Shepherds and then the next they're all
sniffer your butt in your crot they're
all yeah
but imagine no because you can roll
these guys out how do they find prostate
cancer but oh this this is actually F
fascinating clinical trials where the
dog is matched up against you know the
state-of-the-art in um clinical testing
and the dogs blow them out of the water
every time the dogs are like amazing
they're smelling the prostate cancer
cancer yes just by you walking by them
yes so you know how dogs test for covid
is imagine you wanted to test everyone
coming into this museum for Co and
imagine a there's a line out on Saturday
morning there's a line of get that
actually every morning line every
morning so the you take the dog the dog
literally you just line goes down the
line he just runs down the line and if
you have he stops when he barks at you
and you just like man that's a racist
dog man a dog is racist I don't have
Co it's they're astonishingly good at
this WOW State capacity I want the
Strategic puppy Reserve is the thing
that I think this country needs to
strategic puppy Reserve puy that would
work that would get funded like that
that would get funded in a
second if the puppy looks your face you
don't have Co and and there was one they
sadly stopped doing it but in Alabama
they had the brilliant idea of having um
prisoners uh breed dogs for uh testing
purposes and it turned out to be the
most extraordinary it transformed the uh
prison community in a way that they
completely unti I mean it turns out
bringing dogs into that kind of if you
think about it it makes sense but into
that environment just transformed the it
was this sort of um means for
rehabilitation of the prisoners they
were able to identify Co very
easily there were a lot of dog robberies
that started
happening no no no think think about it
it's like I'm joking we need um anyway
I'm I I I want to go in the puppy
Crusade at some point before the next uh
see as a scientist I would just invent
the machine that can smell to the same
parts per billion as a dog well they're
trying they're actually
using they're doing exactly that they're
moving from the dogs back to the machine
now yes that's why that's why I want
yeah what is it the dog you know trying
to figure out what is it the dog is
sensing and then can we perfect our Mach
you can't grab a machine by the ears and
go who a
go also wouldn't you rather be sniffed
by a dog we could put ears on the
machine if okay NE if your colonoscopy
was just a dog sniffing you that's so
much of an upgrade I would take that in
a second that's such an upgrade it
literally should be a dog you should
walk in to your whatever the and it
should there should be a German Shepherd
there or a lab and you walk in he sniffs
you and then you go home I don't know
about German Shepherd though they're a
little intimidating just like you will
let me sniff you
now plus German Shepherds never like
black people exactly there are your
there are your papers there a long we
can use all those all those dogs in in
the Civil Rights Movement they were all
German right that's right okay so we
need a difference
for that yeah we can get something more
more congenial yeah lab dooodle or or
Pomeranian exactly so Malcolm uh your
your podcast yeah uh you this is Pushkin
Industries I think it's called and
you're co-founder of that yes cool and
i' I've enjoyed those that I've listened
to I'm I'm way behind on the total
they're not weakly because they're very
highly produced yeah they're very highly
produced and that's I think a very
strong point for for them and so this
has become your M main advocation now
right yeah that's what I spent most of
my ATT and it's called and the podcast
is called uh revisionist history is my
podcast and we have many others at
pushin but that's that's the one I I
focus on and that one is you take some
bit of story that we all took for
granted or we were taught in a
particular way and you reanalyze it
exactly that's the premise
journalistically yeah that a su premise
that's great and what's your favorite
episode um we did an episode uh four
episodes on what was wrong with The
Little Mermaid and how to fix it oh I
love it with with the movie Yes or with
the with the Disney movie oh the Disney
movie not the original fairy tale no
with the Disney version Oh I love it and
uh can't wait to listen to that it was
it went on forever four episodes four
episodes so your episodes lasted longer
than the movie itself yeah we broke it
down we broke it down we had we pulled
in experts from all sides why you do
this to me
Malcolm we
it was you know because it was um among
the many problems is that uh and plus
Ursula was like this oh yeah D I forgot
about Ur yeah my daughter was my
daughter was like a social justice
Warrior studied I forgot about the whole
controversy around Ursa and the lobster
dude who was really like this very was
he Lobster or was he a hermit crab the
idea that you can find someone a
Jamaican to play that role was just
offends me exactly like we're everywhere
come on we're like this is not like not
that hard you going to have someone
faking a Jamaican accent that's so true
it's just it was embarrassing yeah you
could you could have at least got
Shaggy but but here's the question I
will end with this you when did that
post your those four episodes like was a
couple years ago now years ago
nonetheless that's is that 20 years
after the movie came out would you have
had and others had the mindset MH to
offer that level of critique at the time
or was Society not yet progressively
moved to even have the capacity to think
that way I would like I mean if you
think about the show because otherwise
it's presentism right I don't presentism
we had two issues we had several issues
one issue was we had an issue with the
way the contract law was represented in
the third act and that was as true uh 20
years ago as was today and secondly we
had an issue with the idea that this but
she's giving up her voice for the
exchange of yeah becom human yes and
then the other idea we had a problem
with that a brilliant effervescent
energetic
self-directed mermaid should uh need to
be saved by a prince that I'm sorry 20
years ago that's as egregious as it is
today right but nor is that though nor
is that
uniquely uh applied to The Little
Mermaid that's a recurring I know but
Disney should be held to a higher
standard when it comes to the welfare
intellectual welfare all I'm saying is
that podcast did not come out then and
no I wasn't doing it no but even I'm
just saying no I know what you're saying
I know you're saying well let's ask it
another way what's happening today so
that in 20 years we'll all say oh my
gosh did we really just applaud that oh
everything just everything because we're
regressing now there is a regressive for
there's a regressive force in the nation
right I'm just saying I don't know Neil
I can't think of anything that's
happened in the last month that which
I'm racking my brains right now nothing
coming to mine what about what about you
Chuck so here here I just got one for
you all right um I watched Close
Encounters of the Third Kind okay again
yeah okay recently yeah and it's 50
years old I'm looking at the greeting
Plaza for the aliens 100% of there's 200
people there yeah okay 100% of them are
white men at the time I did did not take
notice of that these are just the
engineers and scientists greeting the
aliens MH and I look closer it turns out
I don't know if I had a different
addition they added footage but then I
found three black people okay they were
just sort of there all three of them had
a broom and a mop in
their so my only point is when I saw the
film didn't agree I had no right place
to stand to even make that observation
yeah and now it's just plain fly obvious
and so it's a celebration of progressive
change in our understanding of the world
and of each other how we treat each
other and so I try not to go back and
criticize at a time when I know I would
have just been in the mix I try not to
do that this is a whole new show you
just bought up right stuff that I just
took for granted yeah yeah man Malcolm
this has been delightful we we should
have we need you more often than just
three times in 15 years i' I've enjoyed
myself thank you guys let me see if I
can top this off with a cosmic
perspective
uh no I
can't Malcolm is all about
perspective on life on the past on the
future on the role science plays in
informing those perspectives so Malcolm
I have nothing to add this is the first
time you've ever Ed those words and I'm
pleased it was in my
presence this has been Star Talk Neil
the grass Tyson here you're a personal
astrophysicist Chuck always good to have
you man always a pleasure and Malcolm
you come back again all right I will all
right as always I bid you to keep
looking up
[Music]